EZP-32195 - Perso API documentation rewrite pt. 2 (#1323)
ezsystems/developer-documentation: docs/guide/personalization/developer_guide/tracking_api.md

# Tracking API

To provide recommendations, a tracking process needs to collect user behavior on the customer's site. 
The most popular user events are:

- Click - When a user opens a detail page.
- Buy/Consume - When a user buys an item or consumes content
- Rate - When a user likes, comments or rates an item
- Login - When a user logs in on a website

> - Clickrecommended - When a user click a recommendation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Clickrecommended - When a user clicks a recommendation
```

For a complete list of events, see [Event types](https://doc.ibexa.co/projects/userguide/en/latest/personalization/event_types) in the user documentation. 
Depending on the event type, some additional parameters, such as item price or user rating, must be provided.

Importing historical user data can help you reduce the delay in delivery of high quality recommendations. 
For more information, see [Importing historical user tracking data](importing_historical_user_tracking_data.md).

Apart from the tracking API, you can add tracking to the website by integrating a JavaScript library.
For more information, see [Tracking with yct.js](tracking_with_yct.md).

## Definitions

> This document is intended for use in eCommerce and content publishing scenarios. 

Reviewer: Aren't these the only two scenarios? ATM it sound like here were some others tat a documented elsewhere, so maybe like this:
```suggestion
You can use the tracking API both in eCommerce and content publishing scenarios. 
```

> eCcommerce mostly uses the term "product", whereas the Publisher domain widely uses the terms "content", 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
eCommerce mostly uses the term "product", whereas the Publisher domain widely uses the terms "content", 
```

|Domain||Item ID|Item Type|
|---|---|---|---|
|eCommerce|Product|ID of a product|Type of a product|

An electronic product could be defined by item type "1" and item id "3298".

A textile product could be defined by item type "2" and item id "3298".

!!! note

    Usually only one item type is sufficient in the eCommerce business as each product available in 
    an eCommerce shop has a unique identifier.

|Domain||Item ID|Item Type|
|---|---|---|---|
|Content publishing|Article|ID of an article|Type of content|
|Content publishing|Video|ID of a video|Type of content|
|Content publishing|Photo Gallery|ID of a photo gallery|Type of content|

Assuming the numbering of content is independent and the same item ID is used twice but for different item types. 
It is therefore impossible to define the difference if there's no segmentation by item types.

If an article, a video and a photo gallery have the same item ID, use different item types to separate 
the items that are tracked.
For example:

- item type "1" and itemid "29712" -> article
- item type "2" and itemid "29712" -> video
- item type "3" and itemid "29712" -> photo gallery

!!! note

>     Even if item ids cannot overlap in a customer's system, we strongly recommend using different item 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Even if item IDs cannot overlap in a customer's system, we strongly recommend using different item 
```

    types to provide independent tracking and cross-item type recommendations like "Users who read 
    this article also watched these videos" or "Users who liked this gallery also read these articles".

## Identifiers

### User identifier

High quality recommendations can only be delivered if the underlying data is correct and consistent. 
For consistent tracking it is crucial to choose and use a consistent identifier for a user. 
A user usually visits a website anonymously. 
Therefore, their identifier is either a first-party cookie or a session ID provided by the website. 
If there's no existing user ID handling that we can re-use, it is recommended that you use your own cookie 
and set the expiry date to at least 90 days from the last usage. 

> If there's a login mechanism, the user is usually tracked with a temporary identifier before the login. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there is a login mechanism, the user is usually tracked with a temporary identifier before the login. 
```

Immediately after a successful login process a "login" event must be sent.

> At this point a pseudonymous user ID, for example, a system's internal registration id, must be used. 

Reviewer: I think "pseudonymous" needs an explanation.

After logout, the anonymous user ID can be used again.

!!! note

    The user identifier is required in tracking requests, otherwise it is discarded from the tracking servers.

    If a browser has JavaScript or cookies disabled, make sure that you put some "dummy" value as identifier in the tracking request to avoid losing tracking information. 
    Even if the event is not user-specific, it is still useful for [popularity models](https://doc.ibexa.co/projects/userguide/en/latest/personalization/recommendation_models/).

The recommendation engine internally creates a hash of every user ID. 
The original ID is not saved. 
It is still possible that the original ID appears in the log files for the debugging purposes but log files are purged regularly. 
The user ID is case sensitive.

### Item identifiers

> People responsible for the sales policy in place in your organiation must decide what should be presented as recommendations on the website. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Persons responsible for the sales policy in place in your organization must decide what should be presented as recommendations on the website. 
```

In the eCommerce business you mostly have the possibility to track items based on:

- **Stock Keeping Unit** (SKU) or
- **Master Item Identifier** (MII)

The exact identifiers that are tracked are also recommended ("*what-you-track-is-what-you-get"*). 

> By default, it is not possible to track SKUs but recommend MIIs. 

Reviewer: MII could use an explanation (SKU is used throughout commerce doc anyway nad is a bit clearer, I think)

> The following example discusses a decision making situation that is typical for eCommerce business:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following use case is typical for eCommerce business:
```

Customer A implements the recommendation engine and decides to use the SKU as item identifiers and recommendable items. 

> End users who browse through the shop **probably get recommendations of the same item that is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
End users who browse through the shop *probably get recommendations of the same item that is 
```

> currently displayed but in a different size and/or color, a so-called "variant"**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
currently displayed but in a different size and/or color, a so-called "variant"*. 
```

The recommendation engine does not recognize relations between items, therefore, every single SKU is used 
to calculate similarities between them. 
In the case of bestsellers, this could lead to the appearance of a shirt in size L on position 2 and 
the same shirt in size M on position 4.

Customer B decides to use the **MII** as item identifiers. 

> This results in recommendations **that do not contain variations of the currently shown item**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This results in recommendations *that do not contain variations of the currently shown item*. 
```

Apart from the tracking API, you can add tracking to the website by integrating a JavaScript library.
For more information, see [Tracking with yct.js](tracking_with_yct.md).

## Definitions

You can use the tracking API both in eCommerce and content publishing scenarios. 
eCommerce mostly uses the term "product", whereas the Publisher domain widely uses the terms "content", 
"article", "images" or "videos". 
Therefore, a generic term "item" is used instead to cover all the above types. 
For further segmentation the term "itemtype" is used, which, in combination with the item ID itself, 
defines a domain specific object.

The following tables show some examples of items that are defined by an item id and an item type:

|Domain||Item ID|Item Type|
|---|---|---|---|
|eCommerce|Product|ID of a product|Type of a product|

An electronic product could be defined by item type "1" and item id "3298".

A textile product could be defined by item type "2" and item id "3298".

!!! note

    Usually only one item type is sufficient in the eCommerce business as each product available in 
    an eCommerce shop has a unique identifier.

> |Domain||Item ID|Item Type|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Domain|Item ID|Item Type|
```
as it's three columns below

In addition to the fact that an item is bought, this event should provide information about 
the product price and quantity.

|Name|Description|Values|
|---|---|---|
|quantity (optional)|The number of products a user has bought. Default value is "1". It is possible to send n events instead of setting this parameter to n.|Integer (default is "1")|
|fullprice (required)|A price for a **single** product. It contains the price in decimal format plus the currency ISO 4217 code. If the price has a decimal part, the point must be used. There can be no space between price and currency.|For example "12.45EUR" or "456JPY"|
|price (deprecated)|**This parameter is deprecated, use the "fullprice" instead!** The price for a single item in Euro cents, for example, 2.25EUR is price=225, default currency "EUR" is assumed.|Integer|
|currency (deprecated)|**This parameter is deprecated, use the "fullprice" instead!** The currency of a price. If left out the default currency "EUR" is assumed.|ISO 4217|

For example, if a user bought 4 pens for 10 Euros, the parameter "fullprice" must be set to "2.50EUR" 

> nd parameter "quantity" to 4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and parameter "quantity" to 4.
```

If product price filtering is activated, the information provided over the product import is used. 
For more information, see [Content API](content_api.md).

The currency is stored with the price and normalized only when statistic information is requested. 
It is often a good choice to select a base currency and convert prices before sending the buy event. 
The price attached to a buy event never overwrites the price which was defined in an item import.

### Login event

Recommendations rely on the fact that user actions can be correlated over a longer period of time. 
Moreover, recommendations similar to "users who viewed this product ultimately bought it" 
require correlating Click events with subsequent Buy events. 
In general, users tend to browse a site anonymously and add products to their shopping cart. 
Up to this point, a user is identified by a visit-scoped variable (for example, a session ID or 
a first party cookie). 
During the check-out of the shopping cart, a user probably logs in to an existing account. 
As a result, the user identifier changes from an anonymous visit-scoped ID (sourceuserid) to a 
pseudonymous, persistent account ID (targetuserid). 

> It is highly desirable to correlate both IDs to correlate the buy events (account ID) with 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is highly recommended to correlate both IDs to correlate the buy events (account ID) with 
```

```suggestion
You should correlate both IDs to correlate the buy events (account ID) with 
```

!!! note "Deprecated 'transfer' event"

>     Based on feedback of our customers and to make the purpose a bit clearer, we renamed the formerly named 'transfer' event to 'login'. As the name implies, it should be used when a user logs in. It covers exactly the same functionality as the transfer event. There is no need to change anything on the customer's side for existing implementations because the transfer event https://event.yoochoose.net/\[solutionid\]/\[customerid\]/transfer/\[sourceuserid\]/\[targetuserid\] is still be supported, even though it should be considered as deprecated.

Reviewer: To consider in future: when was the "former" name used? Is it still relevant for the current audience, that it, could they have encountered the old name at all?

### Basket event

The basket event can be used to add products to a user's shopping cart. 
This event is especially useful if anonymized checkout is allowed or no recurring user 
identification is possible. 
By using the shopping cart products as input for getting recommendations, problems with an empty profile or 
no buy history for the user can be solved. 
The more valuable basket events instead of recent user clicks can be used to provide 
personalized recommendations. 
It also happens quite often that users "store" products on their shopping wishlist and plan 
to buy them later. 
With the help of this information, personalized shopping cart-based recommendations can be provided 
in the whole shop.

`GET https://event.yoochoose.net/api/[customerid]/basket/[userid]/[itemtypeid]/[itemid]`

There are no query string parameters for this event. 

### Rate event

Publishers, media or shops often allow commenting/rating products, articles or movies. 
If a user comments on an item, it indicates a special interest in this topic that has 
to be treated separately.

The format of the URL is:

`GET https://event.yoochoose.net/api/[customerid]/rate/[userid]/[itemtypeid]/[itemid]?rating=50`

> This can also be used for explicit ratings like a five-star rating or any other liquor scale-based rating. 

Reviewer: Liquor? That sound like a leftover from some example that vanished in the meantime.

### Blacklist event

If a website offers a link or button that allows feedback similar to "do not recommend this product 
to me anymore", a user could express that they have bought it already in another shop.

The format of the URL is:

`GET https://event.yoochoose.net/api/[customerid]/blacklist/[userid]/[itemtypeid]/[itemid]`

There are no query string parameters for this event. 

## Tracking events based on recommendations

Tracking events based on integrated recommendations is the only way to measure success of recommendations. 
It is crucial to inform the recommendation engine about which recommendations were shown and 
what recommendations were clicked. 
Otherwise, reliable statistics cannot be calculated and used to check against a customer's KPIs.

A recommendation response already includes the requests to generate a Clickrecommended or Rendered Event. 
They should be used and executed when a recommendation was clicked/accepted or a recommendation was shown. 

> Sending Rendered Events causes as much requests as recommendations to be displayed, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sending Rendered Events causes as many requests as recommendations to be displayed, 
```
